I'd say probably my favourite Welsh variety I've got on the orchard is a variety called
Frederick. It's an old Monmouthshire cider apple. The apples are very, very small actually.
Some of them are about a golf ball size and they've got a very dark kind of skin on them.
It's all mottled and cracked. Really interesting character for a looking fruit and the trees
themselves are very wild. They kind of branch, fork a lot. When you look into a Frederick
tree you can easily tell it because you can see hundreds of forks in the branches. It's
quite a vigorous variety and it does produce a good crop of these little apples that are
an absolute pain to pick. The reason everyone does pick them is it's regarded as a vintage
cider apple variety. When we say vintage what we actually mean is it can make good cider
on its own. Most ciders blend it and so you take a blend of several varieties to get it
but some of the varieties are called vintage and all that basically means is it's good enough on
its own. So Frederick's one of those. It's called a full sharp and what that means is it's a very
acidic apple. It's got a very sharp, you know, appley taste to it. It also does have some tannins
in there which are the kind of dry and bitter characteristics you get. When you make single
variety cider out of it, I mean these days it's probably not to the commercial taste. It's a bit
too sharp. So these days you generally do blend it in but it's an interesting cider. It will ferment
to produce a kind of sharp fruity rich product with nice interesting flavours. I mean historically
as well the variety has also been used for making crabapple jelly. It has enough pectin in there
to make the jelly and so that's one of the other uses it's used for as well. I guess the other
things to say about it is quite often the flesh is quite pink in it so when you press it you get
a pink juice out of there. Sadly that doesn't carry through to the cider. It oxidises out but
it's one of the things you look at and you get a nice pink juice from it but it's a fun variety.
It's a bit of an odd one to prune given its tree shape but yeah I really like it. I haven't done
single variety this year because as I said it's a bit too sharp for the modern palette. I use it
extensively in my May Day, my festival sweet cider and that cider, yeah it's got about say
three parts Frederick to one part bittersweet. That's the kind of blend so it is quite sharp
and appley and I serve it sweet as well and it works like that I'd say. At the moment I'm making
up my sunshine cider and I'm bagging that up then I'm pasteurising the bags and boxing them
and labelling up all ready to go then. Cider is obviously a live natural product when you ferment
it in big barrels and it's full of all kinds of different wild yeasts and bacterias and you know
it's fine and stable as it is but the modern taste of the consumer is basically they want it sweet and
so you have to sweeten it. You can either do it with a natural sugar like I use or you could use
artificial sweetener which I don't believe in. So you need to do something and hence you have to
pasteurise it. So that's basically today's job. After I pasteurise them in the boxes, in the old
days you know you start draining the barrel you get a big air space on the top and it'll be off
within five days and when I started running cider bars with camera and making cider you know over a
decade ago it's a clean and nicer product. You can guarantee when it goes to someone I know it's
going to be good. It's basically what modern industry demands. Well I guess two favourite
parts is one you're outside. You know when you're working in the orchard you're pruning,
you're cutting, you're outside in the fresh air and like I say I love that. I've worked in
office for about 15 years sitting there and I can't stand it. I love being outside. The best,
you know that's probably one of the best bits is being outside and wandering around and the other
bit is when you're like somewhere at a show and you're selling it to the customer and they like
it and they appreciate it there's no better feeling to think I've made this product and
somebody's really happy with it. You know that's wonderful you know you can't pay for that. That's
brilliant.